---
layout: page
title: "Troubleshooting"
category: doc
date: 2015-04-10 09:09:24
---

This page lists some common errors that may occur during the compilation stage.

<br>

#### `ERROR : Generating calculus .scala file failed!`
This error is most probably caused by an error in the ``<calculus_name>_Core.thy`` Isabelle file. Try re-running the script in verbose mode (using ``-v`` flag) and check for the specific error output generated by Isabelle.
To get rid of most errors without modifying the Isabelle files, try the ``--dirty`` __!!!! NOT IMPLEMENTED !!!!__ flag when building.

<br>

#### `ERROR : Missing the core calculus file! Try re-building with -f to rebuild the calculus`
This error is similar to the one above. The core calculus theory file is probably missing. rebuild with ``-f`` flag.

<br>

#### `ERROR : Generating calculus rules .scala file failed!`
This error is most probably caused by an error in the ``<calculus_name>.thy`` Isabelle file. Try re-running the script in verbose mode (using ``-v`` flag) and check for the specific error output generated by Isabelle.
To get rid of most errors without modifying the Isabelle files, try the ``--dirty`` __!!!! NOT IMPLEMENTED !!!!__ flag when building.

<br>

#### `ERROR : Compiling core calculus classes failed!`
There was an error in compiling the generated Scala files. Re-run with ``-v`` to get a detailed output form the Scala compiler.

<br>

#### `[Errno 2] No such file or directory`

If this error occurs right after the line `Compiling Isabelle source files in ...`, try running `isabelle` in a terminal window. If you get an error, please add `isabelle` to your bash PATH variable.